Add cloud-first release notes for v24.2.0 (#18788)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/_includes/releases/v24.2/v24.2.0.md

{{ site.data.alerts.end }}

<div id="feature-highlights">

<h4 id="v24-2-0-performance">Performance</h4>

{% include releases/v24.2/feature-highlights-performance.html %}

<h4 id="v24-2-0-change-data-capture">Change Data Capture</h4>

{% include releases/v24.2/feature-highlights-change-data-capture.html %}

<h4 id="v24-2-0-recovery">Recovery</h4>

{% include releases/v24.2/feature-highlights-recovery.html %}

<h4 id="v24-2-0-security">Security</h4>

{% include releases/v24.2/feature-highlights-security.html %}

<h4 id="v24-2-0-migrations">Migrations</h4>

{% include releases/v24.2/feature-highlights-migrations.html %}

<h4 id="v24-2-0-sql">SQL</h4>

{% include releases/v24.2/feature-highlights-sql.html %}

<h4 id="v24-2-0-operations">Operations</h4>

{% include releases/v24.2/feature-highlights-operations.html %}

<h4 id="v24-2-0-observability">Observability</h4>

{% include releases/v24.2/feature-highlights-observability.html %}

<h4 id="v24-2-0-backward-incompatible-changes">Backward-incompatible changes</h4>

> Before [upgrading to CockroachDB v24.2]({% link v24.2/upgrade-cockroach-version.md %}), be sure to review the following backward-incompatible changes, as well as [key cluster setting changes](#v24-2-0-cluster-settings), and adjust your deployment as necessary.
> 
> - [XXX](): ADD STUFF HERE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CockroachDB v24.2 includes no backward-incompatible changes when upgrading from v24.1.
```
Open to suggestions for how to handle it when there are none.

> Before [upgrading to CockroachDB v24.2]({% link v24.2/upgrade-cockroach-version.md %}), be sure to review the following backward-incompatible changes, as well as [key cluster setting changes](#v24-2-0-cluster-settings), and adjust your deployment as necessary.
> 
> - [XXX](): ADD STUFF HERE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CockroachDB v24.2 includes no backward-incompatible changes or deprecations.
```

Author: thanks Matt - made this change in my local copy which I'll push here shortly!

## v24.2.0

Release Date: August 13, 2024

With the release of CockroachDB v24.2, we've added new capabilities to help you migrate, build, and operate more efficiently. Refer to our summary of the most significant user-facing changes under [Feature Highlights](#v24-2-0-feature-highlights).

{% include releases/new-release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release advisory_key="a103220"%}

> <h3 id="v24-2-0-feature-highlights">Feature highlights</h3>

Author: I think so, they're different IDs.  Tests are all passing.  I don't think anyone needs to read the `div` text, it's internal

> This section summarizes the most significant user-facing changes in v24.2.0 and other features recently made available to CockroachDB users across versions. For a complete list of features and changes in v24.2, including bug fixes and performance improvements, refer to the [release notes]({% link releases/index.md %}#testing-releases) for previous v24.2 testing releases. You can also search the docs for sections labeled [New in v24.2](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/search?query=new+in+v24.2).

Author: this is the same text from the v24.1.0 release, updated to refer to v24.2

I don't fully understand the question. what do you want to check for?

<h4 id="v24-2-0-operations">Operations</h4>

{% include releases/v24.2/feature-highlights-operations.html %}

<h4 id="v24-2-0-observability">Observability</h4>

{% include releases/v24.2/feature-highlights-observability.html %}

{% include releases/v24.2/feature-detail-key.html %}

</div>

<h4 id="v24-2-0-backward-incompatible-changes-and-deprecations">Backward-incompatible changes and deprecations</h4>

CockroachDB v24.2.0 includes no backward-incompatible changes or deprecations.

<h4 id="v24-2-0-key-cluster-setting-changes">Key Cluster Setting Changes</h4>

The following changes should be reviewed prior to upgrading. Default cluster settings will be used unless you have manually set a value for a setting. This can be confirmed by running the SQL statement `SELECT * FROM system.settings` to view the non-default settings.

- [Settings added](#v24-2-0-settings-added)
- [Settings removed](#v24-2-0-settings-removed)
- [Settings with changed defaults](#v24-2-0-settings-with-changed-defaults)
- [Settings with new options](#v24-2-0-settings-with-new-options)
- [Settings with new aliases](#v24-2-0-settings-with-new-aliases)

<h5 id="v24-2-0-settings-added">Settings added</h5>

> - `debug.zip.redact_addresses`: Added the [cluster setting]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}) `debug.zip.redact_addresses.enabled` that allows the user to enable or disable redaction of fields like `hostname` and IP addresses. [#123544][#123544] |

Reviewer: I haven't noticed these before, but it seems redundant to have the cluster setting mentioned as the key for the list item and then a few words later, mentioned again with a link. Also, it's a little strange to consider the setting _value_ to be part of the setting name (key).

Author: will mark this as resolved but agree that this should be improved going forward

> - `kv.transaction.randomized_anchor_key.enabled`: Previously, concurrent transactions that constructed large write batches could cause [hotspots]({% link v24.2/ui-hot-ranges-page.md %}). This was because the [transaction record]({% link v24.2/architecture/transaction-layer.md %}#transaction-records) for all [ranges]({% link v24.2/architecture/reads-and-writes-overview.md %}#range) would coalesce on a single range, which would then cause this range's [leaseholder]({% link v24.2/architecture/reads-and-writes-overview.md %}#leaseholder) to perform all intent resolution work. This is fixed by distributing transaction records randomly across the ranges the write batch touches. In turn, hotspots are prevented. [#125744][#125744]

Reviewer: This one includes the `.enabled` in the key, but the others haven't.

Author: ya these names were auto-pulled by a magic Python script from the generated cluster settings docs.  I'm not sure why some have `.enabled` and others don't.  In this case and the debug zip above I've removed the `.enabled` bit

> - `server.oidc_authentication.client.timeout`: The new [cluster setting]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}) `server.oidc_authentication.client.timeout` allows configuration of the HTTP client timeout for external calls made during [OIDC authentication]({% link v24.2/sso-db-console.md %}). The default timeout is 30 seconds. [#125767][#125767]

Reviewer: This one doesn't include the value in the link text...

Author: thanks, I've updated the link to point to the specific cluster setting anchor for the OIDC client timeout

> - `server.oidc_authentication.client.timeout`: The new [cluster setting]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}) `server.oidc_authentication.client.timeout` allows configuration of the HTTP client timeout for external calls made during [OIDC authentication]({% link v24.2/sso-db-console.md %}). The default timeout is 30 seconds. [#125767][#125767]

Author: ✅

- `sql.auth.grant_option_inheritance.enabled`: Added the [`sql.auth.grant_option_inheritance.enabled` cluster setting]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-sql-auth-grant-option-inheritance-enabled). The default value is `true`, which maintains consistency with CockroachDB's previous behavior: users granted a privilege with [`WITH GRANT OPTION`]({% link v24.2/grant.md %}) can in turn grant that privilege to others. When `sql.auth.grant_option_inheritance.enabled` is set to `false`, the `GRANT OPTION` is not inherited through role membership, thereby preventing descendant roles from granting the privilege to others. However, the privilege itself continues to be inherited through role membership. [#125590][#125590]

> - `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm_backup_storage`, `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm_backup_transport`: Added two new [cluster settings]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}), `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm_backup_storage` and `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm_backup_transport`, which in addition to the existing cluster setting `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm`, can be used to alter the compression algorithm used for various types of [SSTs]({% link v24.2/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#ssts). [#124245][#124245]

Reviewer: Is it worth splitting is up into three listings?

Author: I don't think so.  the `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm` is not new, it has a new option.  And the other two don't really make sense apart IMO.  Another point in favor of keeping them together here is that the release note text (copied verbatim from published RNs) joins them together

<h5 id="v24-2-0-settings-removed">Settings removed</h5>

> - `kv.rangefeed.range_stuck_threshold`: Removed the stuck rangefeed cancel feature and its related [cluster setting]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}) `kv.rangefeed.range_stuck_threshold`, because it was only available in [non-mux rangefeeds]({% link v24.2/advanced-changefeed-configuration.md %}#mux-rangefeeds). Previously, the stuck rangefeed cancel feature was introduced to restart single rangefeeds automatically if they had not received KV updates for some time. [#125663][#125663]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `kv.rangefeed.range_stuck_threshold`: Removed the ability to cancel a stuck rangefeed, along with the related [cluster setting]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}) `kv.rangefeed.range_stuck_threshold`, because it was available only in [non-mux rangefeeds]({% link v24.2/advanced-changefeed-configuration.md %}#mux-rangefeeds). Previously, the stuck rangefeed cancel feature was introduced to restart a single rangefeed automatically if it had not received KV updates for some time. [#125663][#125663]
```

> - `storage.value_blocks.enabled`: The `storage.value_blocks.enabled` [cluster setting]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}) has been removed; value blocks are always enabled. [#122164][#122164]

Reviewer: Is the "always enabled" behavior new or did that happen in a previous version?

Author: it happened in the alpha.1

<h5 id="v24-2-0-settings-with-changed-defaults">Settings with changed defaults</h5>

> - `kv.dist_sender.circuit_breakers.mode` has had its default changed to `liveness range only = 1`.

Reviewer: For this section (probably for next time), it would be ideal to reformat it as a table with a "Previous default" and "New default" column. Then the setting names in the Name column could be linked to the Cluster Settings page.

- `sql.defaults.results_buffer.size` has had its default changed to `512 KiB`: The default value of the `sql.defaults.results_buffer.size` [cluster setting]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}) has been changed from 16KiB to 512KiB. This reduces the chance that clients using [`READ COMMITTED`]({% link v24.2/read-committed.md %}) transactions will encounter errors that cannot automatically be retried within CockroachDB. [#124633][#124633]

> - `sql.metrics.max_mem_stmt_fingerprints`, `sql.metrics.max_mem_txn_fingerprints` have had default changed to `7500`: The default values for the [cluster settings]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}) `sql.metrics.max_mem_stmt_fingerprints` and `sql.metrics.max_mem_txn_fingerprints` have been changed from `100000` to `5000`, thus lowering the default limits for in-memory statement and transaction fingerprints. [#123430][#123430]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `sql.metrics.max_mem_stmt_fingerprints` and `sql.metrics.max_mem_txn_fingerprints` have each had their defaults changed to `7500`: The default values for the [cluster settings]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}) `sql.metrics.max_mem_stmt_fingerprints` and `sql.metrics.max_mem_txn_fingerprints` have been changed from `100000` to `5000`, thus lowering the default limits for in-memory statement and transaction fingerprints. [#123430][#123430]
```
This could use a rewrite to say "changed from X to Y" but also I'm confused if the new value was changed to 7500 or to 5000.

Author: in v24.2.0 beta they're def at 7500 

```
select variable, value from [show cluster settings] where variable ilike '%sql.metrics.max_mem_%';
                     variable                    | value
-------------------------------------------------+---------
  sql.metrics.max_mem_reported_stmt_fingerprints | 100000
  sql.metrics.max_mem_reported_txn_fingerprints  | 100000
  sql.metrics.max_mem_stmt_fingerprints          | 7500
  sql.metrics.max_mem_txn_fingerprints           | 7500
(4 rows)
```

I bet the code was updated in the cockroachdb PR and the release note commit message was not 

I'll change everything to 7500 here 

thanks for calling this out!

Author: ah upon inspection it looks like maybe the bump to 7500 was in a later PR, either way it's adjusted here

> - `sql.stats.histogram_samples.count` has had its default changed to `0`: Histograms are no longer constructed using a default sample size of `10k`. Samples are now dynamically sized based on table size unless the sample count has been set in the table or [cluster settings]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}). [#125345][#125345]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `sql.stats.histogram_samples.count` has had its default changed to `0`: Histograms are no longer constructed using a default sample size of `10k`. Samples are now sized dynamically based on table size unless the sample count has been set in the table or [cluster settings]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}). [#125345][#125345]
```
"set in the table settings"? or really "set in the table or set in cluster settings"?

Author: I think "set in the table" refers to using https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/stable/create-statistics

so AFAICT the original release note is right

added your text edit, thanks!

> - `sql.ttl.default_delete_rate_limit` has had its default changed to `100`: The storage parameter `ttl_delete_rate_limit`, which determines the rate limit for deleting expired rows, is now set to `100` by default. [#124354][#124354]

Reviewer: In several of these the second sentence seems to duplicate the first.

Author: ya it's a bit duplicative, I think in future this should be a table.  I originally wanted to make this a simple list for much easier scanning eg 

- `foo.bar` was changed to `123`
- `baz.quux` was changed to `456`

but after looking at the v24.1.0 release notes it looked like the cluster settings there were copied over "Release notes style"

however that format is terrible for scanning "what changed"

this is also not great, but maybe (?) better for scanning

for the next release it would be ideal IMO to have a table

<h5 id="v24-2-0-settings-with-new-options">Settings with new options</h5>

> - `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm` has added the (non-default) option `none = 3`: The compression option `none` was added to allow for the disabling of SSTable compression. This option can be used with any of the three existing cluster settings that control SSTable compression: `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm`, `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm_backup_storage`, and `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm_backup_transport`. [#126508][#126508]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm` has added the option `none = 3`: The compression option `none` was added to allow for the disabling of SSTable compression. This option is disabled by default, but can can be used with any of the three existing cluster settings that control SSTable compression: `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm`, `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm_backup_storage`, and `storage.sstable.compression_algorithm_backup_transport`. [#126508][#126508]
```

Author: ✅

<h5 id="v24-2-0-settings-with-new-aliases">Settings with new aliases</h5>

> - `changefeed.batch_reduction_retry.enabled` is aliased to `changefeed.batch_reduction_retry_enabled`

Reviewer: Are the new aliases preferred or we don't mind? This might be better formatted as a table.

Author: ya might be nice as a table next time

re: preferring aliases, idk - AFAICT we do not have clear product view in this area

historically cluster setting format / design has per-team ownership (and thus idiosyncratic format/design)
